---
title: "Region1CyanoData2014"
author: "Bryan Milstead"
date: "January 13, 2015"
output: html_document
---
<!---
use these command instead of the knit icon if you want the data and work loaded into the R workspace
  library(knitr)
    setwd("Data2014")
      a<-getwd()
        if(substr(a,nchar(a)-8,nchar(a))=='Reg1Cyano')  {setwd('./Data2014/')
          } else {if(substr(a,nchar(a)-7,nchar(a))!='Reg1Cyano') print('WARNING: Wrong Working Directory')}
  knit('Data2014.rmd')
-->
To Do List
-------------------------
* Need data from ME
* Map locations and send to contacts for verifications


Introduction
-------------------------
During the summer of 2014 the New England states initiated a monitoring program for cyanobacteria in lakes.  Participants included state and tribal governments, local watershed associations, EPA Region 1, and the EPA Atlantic Ecology Division. 

The task now is to collate all the data into a standardized format.  Below are the data processing steps used and some questions to be resolved for each data contributor.

A simple excel template for data entry is available here: https://github.com/willbmisled/Reg1Cyano/blob/master/Data2014/Region1CyanobacteriaDataEntryTemplate.xls?raw=true

This document is available here: https://github.com/willbmisled/Reg1Cyano/blob/master/Data2014/Data2014.md

The details of all data processing steps including notes and rcode are available here: https://github.com/willbmisled/Reg1Cyano/blob/master/Data2014/Data2014.Rmd

The collated dataset is available here in .csv format (hint: right click on the link and choose “Save As” to save the file to your computer, otherwise, it will open in your browser): https://github.com/willbmisled/Reg1Cyano/blob/master/Data2014/Data2014.csv?raw=true

A document showing how the locations and WBID's were defined and where to download a KML file of the locations can be found here: https://github.com/willbmisled/Reg1Cyano/blob/master/Data2014/Locations2014.md

Data Definitions
-------------------------

Field  | Units | Description
------------- | ------------- | -------------
**Order:**|(integer)|Unique Identifier for sample by Organization-disregard this is for house keeping only.
**YourName:**|(text)|Enter the name of the person entering the data
**Organization:**|(text)|Enter the name of the organization responsible for collecting the samples-e.g. Vermont DEC
**SiteID:**|(text)|If the location has a site ID from your organization enter it here
**WaterbodyName:**|(text)|Enter the name of the lake: be consistent with spelling and capitalization
**State:**|(lookup)|Choose the two letter state code from the drop down list
**SiteLocation:**|(text)|Some organizations have site names within a lake.  Enter these here.
**SampleYear:**|(YYYY)|Year sample was collected in format YYYY (e.g., 2014)
**SampleMonth:**|(MM)|Month sample was collected in integer format (e.g., months 1 to 12 )
**SampleDay:**|(DD)|Day sample was collected in integer format (e.g., day 1 to 31 )
**NameOfSamplers:**|(text)|Add the names of the field crew separated by commas.
**WeatherConditions:**|(text)|General Weather conditions separated by commas.  E.g., Cloudy, Windy, Cold
**SampleLocation:**|(lookup)|Where (in the lake) was the sample collected followed by the replicate number? WithinLake=WL1, WL2, or WL3; ShoreSide=SS1, SS2, SS3; Can also add Calibration or Blank for validation readings or Other.
**SampleMethod:**|(lookup)|How was the sample collected? Grab = Grab sample for surface blooms; Composite =Composite; Integrated = Integrated tube sample; Validation = Use this for Blanks and Calibration Standards; Other = give details in the comments section.
**Depth:**|(integer)|Within Lake samples are at 3m and Shoreside are at 1m.  If samples taken at different depths not the depth here and enter details in the comments section.  Leave blank for standards and blanks.
**Latitude:**|(decimal)|Latitude in Decimal Degrees with 4 decimal places or degrees minutes seconds
**Longitude:**|(decimal)|Longitude in Decimal Degrees with 4 decimal places or degrees minutes seconds
**SampleHour:**|(HH)|Hour sample was taken in 24 hour format
**SampleMinutes:**|(MM)|Minute sample was taken in integer format
**Filtered:**|(TRUE/FALSE)|Was the sample filtered?
**Frozen:**|(TRUE/FALSE)|Was the sample frozen?
**Parameter:**|(lookup)|Phycocyanin or Chlorophyll?
**Value:**|(decimal)|Reading from the fluorometer
**Units:**|(lookup)|What were the units recorded.  If not "RFU" or "µ/L" flag the entry and add comment with the units used. 
**Rep:**|(integer)|If you made more than one measurement per sample or took more than one sample per site assign a replicate number to each observations and add notes in the comment field.
**Fluorometer:**|(lookup)|Type of fluorometer used?
**AnalysisYear:**|(YYYY)|Year sample was analyzed in format YYYY (e.g., 2014)
**AnalysisMonth:**|(MM)|Month sample was analyzed in integer format (e.g., months 1 to 12 )
**AnalysisDay:**|(DD)|Day sample was analyzed in integer format (e.g., day 1 to 31 )
**AnalysisHour:**|(HH)|Hour sample was analyzed in 24 hour format
**AnalysisMinutes:**|(MM)|Minute sample was analyzed in integer format
**GPSType:**|(text)|How was the location determined.  GPS (type), map, or google?
**Photos:**|(TRUE/FALSE)|Where photos taken?
**Flag:**|(TRUE/FALSE)|Add a flag for any data line that needs further validation or processing
**Comments:**|(text)|Add details of flags or any notes about the data line or sample.
**ID:**|(integer)|Unique Identifier for Sample
**LocID:**|(integer)|Unique Identifier for the Location based on unique Lon/Lat combinations

Data Sources
-------------------------
Information on how the data were provided by the States and Organizations that participated in the monitoring.


### Vermont

* Data received from Hilary Snook (forwarded from Angela Shambaugh-VTDEC) on 11/13/14
* Original file name: VERMONT Beagle FluoroQuick data_Summer 2014.xlsx renamed VTDEC.xlsx
* Responses to my queries answered by Angela Shambaugh on 12/19/2014

**Questions for Angela with responses from Angela (AS), Hilary Snoork (HS) and me (BM):**

* Do we need to treat the two groups of data ("calibrated pigment readings" & "after calibration loss") separately?
    - AS: Depends on Hilary’s experience when re-calibrating my Beagle unit.  I don’t know if he was able to tell how much drift there was over the summer.
    - HS: I’ll hopefully be checking these out today. 
    - BM: tables combined and the "after calibration loss" lines flagged.
* What are the differences between the two groups of data?
    - AS: I apparently invalidated the instrument calibration halfway through the summer by mistakenly starting the full calibration process and then incorrectly exiting.  The check standards Hilary provided were not at all consistent with expected reading so I stopped reporting phycocyanin units and switched to relative fluorescence units.  
* What is the difference between "blank" and "blank(2)" in the "station" field?
    - AS: Blank refers to a DI sample read at the beginning of each session, blank 2 refers to a second reading of the same sample at the end of the session.
    - BM: leave as is for now.
* For parameter what do: "channel 1 hi", "channel 1 lo", and channel 2 lo" represent?
    - AS: If I understood the Beagle unit correctly, Channel 1 refers to the phycocyanin filter and channel 2 to the chlorophyll filter.  It wasn’t clear to me the difference between high and low – Hilary may be able to answer that better.  Hopefully after recalibrating the instrument, we can interpolate and change all the relative fluorescent units to phycocyanin.  Currently, any number associated with a channel will be RFU.  Anything associated with the terms ‘phycocyanin’ or ‘chlorophyll’ will be biomass (as µg/L).
    - HS: Hi/Lo is automatically selected by the instrument based on sample fluorescence and does not need to be manually selected by the user. This was pretty cryptic in the user manual and I will clarify this at the upcoming meeting.
    - BM: add units="RFU"  for all samples where parameter= channel 1 or 2; add units="µg/L" for all samples where parameter="phycocyanin or chlorophyll"; change paramater="channel 1 (hi or lo)" to "Phycocyanin"; change paramater="channel 2 (hi or lo)" to "Chlorophyll"
* Where were the samples taken?  Shoreside? or Within Lake?  I'm assuming that the 1m depth samples are Shoreside and the 3m or greater depth samples are within lake but would like to verify.
    - AS: All locations from the Champlain TMDL sites (#4 – 51) will be offshore.  RT 78 Access is shoreline as is the Black Bridge location. The others ( Highgate Cliffs, Highgate Springs, Phillipsburg and QE BM-b) are all off shore.  As part of our cyanobacteria monitoring, we take only surface samples for microcystin analysis – hence any surface scums at offshore locations will be surface grabs. 
    - BM: change "RT 78 Access" and "Black Bridge" to SS1; the rest are WL1
* What are the units for fluorometer readings?
    - AS: Beagle units are µg/L, I think.  Hilary can confirm.
    - HS: Yes, readout is in micrograms/liter (ppb)
    - BM: µg/L
* For the "sample state" VTDEC reports the conditions as  c("filtered, CDOM, fresh", "fresh","frozen","DI", "24 hours old", "white", "orange", "blue","", "red", "green", "yellow","pink").  What information is important?  For each condition we need to know whether the sample was frozen (TRUE/FALSE) or filtered (TRUE/FALSE) before the fluoremeter reading was taken. 
    - AS: The colors under ‘sample state’ refer to the solid check standards provided by Hilary so the terms frozen/filtered do not apply.  The 24hr sample old sample was not frozen or filtered.  All CDOM samples were filtered and not frozen.  All fresh samples were unfrozen and unfiltered.  If it is easier, I can re-send my data using the EXCEL spreadsheet you sent out.
    - BM: all samples except those for sample.state=='Frozen' changed to Frozen=FALSE; samples for sample.state="...CDOM..." changed to Filtered==TRUE, the rest are Filtered=FALSE.
* Please check the file VTDEC_Locations.csv.  I have some of the locations but not all.  The locations I have were gleaned from the lake Champlain reports.  In some cases I used Google Earth to get the locations from the descriptions so I don't have a lot of confidence in the locations.  Can you verify the locations (I can send a map of the locations if you wish) and help me with the ones that are missing?
    - AS: I added lat lons to your table for the missing locations.  If you took the lat lon for the other stations from the Champlain TMDL files, they should be correct.  The updates are attached.

**Data steps**-View code in Data2014.rmd document to see details.

* table="calibrated pigment readings" in VTDEC.xlsx saved as VTDEC_calibrated.csv; read into R
* table="after calibration loss" in VTDEC.xlsx saved as VTDEC_uncalibrated.csv; read into R;Flag=TRUE;Comment="Uncertain Calibration Status"
* both tables combined into df=VT
* Build VTDEC data.frame
* Add to data.frame Data2014



### Charles River Watershed Association

* Data received from Elisabeth Cianciola on 12/12/14
* Original file name: CRWA_Region1CyanobacteriaDataEntryTemplate.xls renamed CRWA.xls
* Resaved as CRWA_RAW.csv for import into R

**Questions for Elisabeth with her responses**

* Were all samples collected with the integrated tube sampler?
    - EC: Yes
* What were the units for the fluorometer readings?  RFU? µg/L?
    - EC: µg/L
    
**Data steps**-View code in Data2014.rmd document to see details.

* Data originally entered in a version of Region1CyanobacteriaDataEntryTemplate.xls so little massaging was needed.
* CWRA_RAW.csv imported into R
* Each field verified with consistency checks
* Field updated where necessary.
* Add to data.frame Data2014



### New Hampshire

* Data received from Sonya Carlson on 11/19/14
* Original file name: NH-2014-11-19-PhycoData.xlsx renamed NHDES.xlsx
* Additional Location information received from Sonya as 'NHDES_MissingLocations.csv' on 1/9/15


**Questions for Sonya: with her responses**

* The locations are in tab "List_Frame_1" and the Data are in the data tab.  Both sets of data appear to be linked by the first column ("#" or "Sample #").  It appears that a some of the lines are out of order (i.e., 2 & 3 and 83 & 84).  This is not a problem I just adjusted them.  Is this okay?
    - SC: Okay
* In the data tab there are 2 entries for Sample#=42.  The first for DESStationID=BEELTUFD is not in the List_Frame_1 tab but the second (DESStationID=BROOSSD) is.  To correct this I used the location information from Sample#=54 (DESStationID=BEELTUFD).  Is this okay?
    - SC: Okay
* For Sample#=135 the DES Station ID is "TOWCAN-GEN
" in the Data tab and "TOWCND-GEN" in the List_Frame_1 tab.  Which is correct?
    - SC: TOWCND-GEN: this is corrected above
* Could you verify the units for the Beagle readings.  You have mg/l but others report µg/L.
    - SC: Should be µg/L-corrected above.
* Are all Turner readings in RFU and all beagle in µg/L?  
    - SC: Yes
* Were all samples except the Grab samples collected with  an integrated sampler (a hose)?
    - SC: Yes


**Data steps**-View code in Data2014.rmd document to see details.

* The fluorometer data are in NHDES.XLSX tab:Data. This is copied to NHDES_RAW.csv and modified as follows:
  - First column ("#") containing a sequential list of numbers is renamed "Order"
  - There are two observations for Order=42;the first does not match the location information but the second does.
  - First occurence of Order=42 changed to Order=144; it is then cut and pasted to the bottom of the sheet.
  - The location information for the new NHDES_Raw:Order=144 data matches NHDES_Locations:Order=54. See NHDES_Locations.csv below. 
  - Order=135 the DES Station ID doesn't match the Location table.  I checked with Sonya and changed the NHDES_RAW value to 'TOWCND-GEN'.
  - The "adjusted turner" and calculated "ratio" fields were deleted.
  - The value fields for the Fluorometry readings are on three lines.  These were combined into a single field name using the following convention: Pigment_Units_Fluorometer_SampleState_FilterState.  These will be split up and renamed later.
* Location information is in NHDES.XLSX tab:List_Frame1.  This is copied to NHDES_Locations.csv and modified as follows:
    - First column ("#") containing a sequential list of numbers is renamed "Order"
    - Missing location information for NHDES_Raw:Order=144 same as information NHDES_Locations:Order=54.  This line is copied and appended to the bottom and the Locations:Order is Changed to 144
    - Observations for Order=2 and Order=3 are reversed between NHDES_Raw.csv and NHDES_Data.csv.  Locations:Order=2 changed to 3 and Locations:Order=3 changed to 2.
    - Observations for Order=83 and Order=84 are reversed between NHDES_Raw.csv and NHDES_Data.csv.  Locations:Order=83 changed to 84 and Locations:Order=84 changed to 83.



* update missing locations with information received from Sonya Carlson on 1/9/15
  - Locations in "NHDES_MissingLocations.csv"
  - Received locations for 6 locations.
  - No locations fro Rockybound Pond SS#1 and SS#2 near the town of Croydon NH
  - Approximate locations for these sites is the approximate centroid of the lake.
  - Update Lat/Lon 
  - Add comments
* Add to data.frame Data2014



### Connecticut

* Data received from Tracy Lizotte on 11/17/14
* Original file name: "Cyanobacteria data Summer 2014.xlsx" saved as CTDEEP.xlsx
* had trouble reading the .xlsx file so file resaved as CTDEEP.XLS

Questions for Tracy:

* For the Housatonic River (Kettletown) on 7/7/2014 the fluorometer values are "337.23//254.39", "310.87//363.l59", "24.91//7.50", and "2.50//5.50".  Do these represent multiple observations from the same sample or perhaps readings from 2 different samples? For now I am calling these reps and have separated the values.
    - TL 1/7/14: These are multiple observations from the same sample.
* What are the measurement units? RFU, µg/L?
    - TL 1/7/14: The measurements are in RFU.
* Where were the samples taken?  Shoreside? or Within Lake?
    - TL 1/7/14: All samples were taken at shoreside .
* What depth were the samples taken at?
    - TL 1/7/14: Samples procedures called for taking the integrated samples at approximately 1.0 m.
* How were the samples taken?  Grab samples? Whole Water Samples? Integrated Tube Samples?
    - TL 1/7/14: Samples were composite grab samples taken with a Modified Integrated Sample Tube. 
* I have some but not all of the Latitude and Longitudes for the lakes.  Please check the file CTDEEP_Locations.csv and verify the locations (I can send a map of the locations if you wish) and fill in missing values. 
    - TL 1/7/14: Working on it.
* Were any samples frozen?
    - TL 1/7/14:  No, the results that you have at this point are all from as is sample.

**Data steps**-View code in Data2014.rmd document to see details.
* Data organized with a separate lake in each tab.  These are read directly into R and the data from the separate sheets are combined into a single data.frame.

* Each lake has a parameter field that includes many parameters besides the fluorometry data but most of these are missing values.
* The dataset includes many parameters but only the Chlorophyll and Phycocanin observations will be kept.
* The Parameters with Chlorophyll and Phycocyanin include information on whether the samples were filtered or not. We'll assume that the samples were not frozen.
* The parameter field was parsed as follows (NOTE: observations with ParameterNew=NA were deleted):

```
##                      Parameter ParameterNew Filtered Frozen
## 26  Air temp at time of sample         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 24           Algae Concentrate         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 23               Algal ID Grab         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 1                   Alkalinity         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 9                 Ammonia as N         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 19                    Anotoxin         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 21            Anotoxin- Filter         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 2                      Calcium         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 30                Chl a- As is  Chlorophyll    FALSE  FALSE
## 22               Chl a- Filter  Chlorophyll     TRUE  FALSE
## 29             Chl a- Filtrate  Chlorophyll     TRUE  FALSE
## 36            Chl a (filtered)  Chlorophyll     TRUE  FALSE
## 34          Chl a (unfiltered)  Chlorophyll    FALSE  FALSE
## 3                    Chlorides         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 25       Day's mean water temp         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 4                     Hardness         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 5                    Magnesium         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 18                 Microcystin         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 20          Microcystin-Filter         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 10                Nitrate as N         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 11                Nitrite as N         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 12  NOX (nitrate-nitrite as N)         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 16              orthophosphate         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 32          Phycocyanin- As is  Phycocyanin    FALSE  FALSE
## 31       Phycocyanin- Filtrate  Phycocyanin     TRUE  FALSE
## 35      Phycocyanin (filtered)  Phycocyanin     TRUE  FALSE
## 33    Phycocyanin (unfiltered)  Phycocyanin    FALSE  FALSE
## 27                 Secchi tube         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 6              Suspened Solids         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 14                         TKN         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 17                         TOC         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 13         Total Nitrogen as N         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 15        Total Phosphate as P         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 7                 Total Solids         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 8                    Turbidity         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 372             Chl a-Filtrate  Chlorophyll     TRUE  FALSE
## 363        Microcystin- Filter         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 782            Anotoxin-Filter         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
## 783               Chl a-Filter  Chlorophyll     TRUE  FALSE
## 37                        <NA>         <NA>     TRUE  FALSE
```
* The value field contains a mix of numeric values, character values, and missing values.  
* The table below shows the number of occurences of each non-numeric value

```
##                                           Var1 Freq
## 1  *Absorbance standards could not be detected    0
## 2                                 Failed test*    0
## 3                                          N/A    0
## 4                                Not collected    0
## 5                                   2.50//5.50    0
## 6                                  24.91//7.50    0
## 7                              310.87//363.l59    0
## 8                             337.23//254.39      0
## 9                               Not collected     0
## 10                                        <NA>  588
```
* The first four character values (two number separated by 2 slashes) appear to be two readings for the same sample.  Split these into two lines.  Assign the first to Rep=1 with Value = the first value.  Assign the second to Rep=2 with Value = the second value. 
* Delete observations with Value="not Collected" or NA

* Data massage complete-build CTDEEP
* Add to data.frame Data2014
* Missing CTDEEP locations received from Tracy Lizotte on 1/8/14 (CTDEEP_Locations.csv)
* Latitude and Longitude updated


### University of New Hampshire

* Data received from Amanda Murby on 12/29/14
* Original file name: "Region1CyanobacteriaDataEntryTemplate_NewHampshire-UNH2014.xls" saved as UNH.xls
* Some updated locations received from Jim Haney 1/9/15 as "UNH_MissingLocations.xlsx"  saved as UNH_MissingLocations.csv - more information on this below
 
**Questions for Amanda:**
I've been modifying the template as I process data.  One of the fields added since you got the template is a column for "SampleMethod" that identifies how the sample was collected (Integrated Tube Sample, Grab Sample, etc.).  Several of the questions below relate to this and others not. The questions are: 

* The "Depth"" field has a mixture of depth ranges and single depth values.  Do these represent different sample methods?  For example are the depth ranges (e.g., 0-4) from the integrated tube samplers?  How were the single depth samples collected? 
    - AM 12/31/15: Those with 0-4 or other are integrated. Those as 0 were surface samples by grab. Those with just one depth were sampled by bottle, such as a Van Dorn, discrete water sampler.
* The "TypeOfSample" field has many missing values. What are these samples? and, How were they collected?
    - AM 12/31/15: No response
* What are the measurement units? RFU? µg/L?
    - AM 12/31/15: RFU
* What do the Flags=Yes represent? Most comments for these lines are blank.
    - AM 12/31/15: see answer below
* Missing Longitude and Latitude?
    - AM 12/31/15: We had to google for approx. GPS. However, I didn't know the exact long and lat for the lakes with multiple sites. I flagged yes for those that did not have lat/long yet. I could find out from those who sampled. I should have copied the same comment for all of those flagged. 
    - BM add comment "Location Approximate or Missing" to Flag=YES observations
* Was the Beagle used for all readings
    -AM 1/14/15 Yes for the data sent. 

**Data steps**-View code in Data2014.rmd document to see details.

* Data originally entered in a version of Region1CyanobacteriaDataEntryTemplate.xls 
* UNH_RAW.csv imported into R
* Each field verified with consistency checks
* Fields updated where necessary.



* Jim Haney has informed us (1/12/15) that the site identified as UNH$WaterbodyName=='Wentworth' & UNH$SiteLocation=='Center' in the orginal dataset sent by Amanda should be changed to UNH$WaterbodyName=='Crescent Lake' & UNH$SiteLocation=='Center' 



* update missing locations with information received from Jim Haney 1/9/15 (UNH_MissingLocations.csv)
* location for Lake Wentworth SiteLocation=NA still missing; set to approximate lake centroid. (Latitude=43.597897 & Longitude=-71.157598)
* Update Lat/Lon 
* Add to data.frame Data2014



### Rhode Island

* Data prepared by Linda Green, Elizabeth Herron, & Vuarnelle Urena
* Data received from Elizabeth Herron on 1/6/15
* Original file name: "Region1CyanobacteriaData_ URI_Watershed_Watch-Sent.xlsx" saved as RIWW.xlsx
* Data also saved as RIWW.csv for import into R

**Questions for RIWW**
* How were the samples collected?  Integrated Sampler?
    - EH 1/7/14: Integrated
* What were the units? 
    - EH 1/7/14: µ/L 

**Data steps**-View code in Data2014.rmd document to see details.

* Data entered in an earlier version of Region1CyanobacteriaDataEntryTemplate.xls 
* RIWW.csv imported into R
* Each field verified with consistency checks
* Field updated where necessary.
* Add to data.frame Data2014




### Maine

* Data in prep by Linda Bacon

Save Data2014
-------------------------
* Add "ID" field to track observations 
* Add "LocID" field to track locations
* WBID, Location, and Distance fields added from SpatialPointsDataFrame 




 
* Review and standardize the data
* Save as "Data2014.csv" 
  








